---
title: "More on the MCU Kang the Conqueror"
categories: loki mcu kang
date: 2021-07-17 09:20:00 -0000
---
> Finally, late in Richards' autobiographical monologue, he tells us which Richards he was.

> "That first variant encountered a creature created from all the tears in reality, capable of consuming time and space itself," Richards tells Loki and Sylvie, talking about the smoke monster Alioth we saw policing The Void in last week's episode. "I weaponized Alioth. And I ended the Multiversal War. Once I isolated our timeline, all I had to do was manage the flow of time and prevent further branches."

> First thing here: in the multiverse, everyone is a variant. There is no "original" version. So when he talks about the "first variant" there he just means he's referring to the first version of himself that he had mentioned earlier in this story, and not some hierarchy of versions of himself.

> Second: this version of Richards that we know is that that first variant. Which means he is not including himself among the warmongers — those were other variants. He could be smudging the truth, what with villains often think they're the hero and all that. Not to mention that he may actually have destroyed all those other universes, which is not something you would think a nice person would do. On the other hand, none of us has ever been in a Multiversal War. Let's just say we don't have enough context to judge this guy.

> But we do have to take him at his word on some level. This whole sequence with Richards, which took most of the episode, was basically an exposition dump. If Marvel was trying to deceive us with this conversation, it would have happened before the finale. The norms of Hollywood storytelling indicate we should be able to take this guy mostly at his word.

> So if this guy spewing all this exposition at Loki and Sylvie isn't Kang, then who is? Well, I think we saw a statue of him in the last shot of the episode.

> Near the end of Sylvie and Loki's chat with Richards, they ask him how he could trust them with this choice.

> "What's the worst that can happen? You either take over and my life's work continues, or you plunge a blade in my chest and an infinite amount of me start another Multiversal War. And I just end up right back here anyways. Reincarnation, baby."

> Sylvie kicks Loki back to the TVA, then kills Richards, triggering the multiverse. And then Loki learns that Richards was wrong. He didn't end up back there. Now a Richards variant is openly leading the TVA instead of hiding behind the facade of the Time-Keepers.

> Richards thought that if the multiverse came into being that the exact same stuff would play out again. But it didn't. Maybe there was another multiversal war, with just one Nathaniel Richards remaining by the end– but a different one this time. A bad one. Kang the Conqueror. It's exactly the kind of poetic dualism that Hollywood storytellers love. And it preserves the multiverse even with a new TVA, because as his title indicates he wants to conquer other realities, not destroy them.

> Understanding what's happening at the TVA here is difficult to discuss. There's no before or after for the TVA — remember, it exists outside of time. That is a hard thing to depict in this specific sequence because, likewise, there's no before and after the multiverse. When the multiverse came back, it simply was there, and from the TVA's perspective all of time played out at once, including that hypothetical multiversal war.

> And it would have been affected by those events, because even though the TVA is outside of time and the multiverse, it only exists because somebody from inside the multiverse created it. If there's a different Nathaniel Richards in charge, that would either erase the TVA completely, or change it dramatically. But how to you portray that change to the TVA as it's happening? You can't, because it's basically indescribable. Something like that is outside the scope of our understanding. But they can show us the effect of the change, which it seems like they did.

> All of this is paradoxical, at least to how we perceive reality in the real world. "Loki" is using its own logic, though, for all this multiverse stuff, and since it's all very new still we can't work out that logic just yet. As with Netflix's twisty German time travel series "Dark," you're just gonna have to accept that paradoxes are going to be a part of all this multiverse stuff. 